Overview
--------
The RHESsys parameter database 'params.sqlite' contains a collection
of RHESsys runtime parameters contributed by the ECOHydrology lab and
other researchers.

The Python scripts in the ./util directory can be used to search for,
add and delete parameters from the database. The following scripts are
currently available: insertParams.py, searchParams.py,
deleteParams.py. For convenience, the BASH scripts inserParams.sh,
searchParams.sh and deleteParams.sh can be used to call the
corresponding Python script.

Initial database creation and population
----------------------------------------
In order to create the params.sqlite database for the first time, run
the script createParamDB.sh.

The insertParams.py script is used to read parameters from a
definition file (.def) and enter them into the database.

Class Hierarchy
---------------
The parameter database is organized into parameter classes which
corresponds to the groupings of parameters in .def files. Typical
class names are "Deciduous", "Red Alder", "sandy-loam".

These classes are organized into a simple hierarchy, where each class
may have one parent class. The class hierarchy is only two levels
deep, for example "Deciduous" is the parent class and "Red Alder" is
the child. The class "Deciduous" does not have a parent.

Classes may be specified with or without a location, for example, a
set a parameters may be in the database for "Red Alder", no location
specified and a separate set of parameter may exist for "Red Alder",
"Orgeon".

Hierarchical Search
-------------------
This scheme of class hierarchy and location generic or location
specific classes minimizes duplication of parameters for similar
classes.  For example, it is possible to enter a full set of
parameters for class "Deciduous", and then only enter parameters that
are unique to Red Alder in the class "Red Alder" (no location
specified). Then for Red Alder occurring in Oregon, only unique
parameter for Orgeon are entered in the class "Red Alder", "Oregon".

When parameters are retrieved using the "hierarchical" search method,
more specified classes override the general, so when retrieving
parameters for "Red Alder", "Oregon", parameter are retrieved for the
parent class "Deciduous", then the location generic class "Red Alder",
then the location specific class "Red Alder", "Oregon":

    - "Red Alder", "Oregon" -> overrides duplicates of "Red Alder" ->
      overrides duplicates of "Deciduous"

The parameter "stratum_default_ID" is handled specially by the
database software. This parameter used to be contained in each .def
file used by RHESsys, which requires that the value of this parameter
is unique across all .def files that are used in a RHESsys modeling
run. With the use of the parameter database it is necessary for the
database software to maintain a unique number for this parameter for
each class in the database. The database software therefore determines
the correct value for this parameter when the database is searched and
a parameter file is written. The value used is the class_id value for
the class that was requested during the search. For example, if we
performed the search:

    ./searchParams.py -v --searchType=hierarchical --class="Red Alder"
    --location="Oregon" --format=param

the class_id for "Red Alder", "Oregon" would be used (the requested
class), even though other classes have contributed parameters to the
output, in this case, "Deciduous" and "Red Alder" (no location
specified).

Constrained Search
------------------
An alternative to the hierarchical search is the more standard
"constrained" search in which parameters are retrieved based on a
match of all the search terms in an 'and' condition, for example, the
search:

   ./searchParams.py -v --searchType=constrained --genus="Alnus"
   --param="snow" --format=csv

returns just the parameters for genus "Alnus" and parameter names that
contain the string "snow":

    Red
    Alder,Oregon,specific_snow_capacity,0.0015,Alnus,rubra,2013-04-15
    08:56:07,,Peter Slaughter

The constrained search is intended for informational purposes only, as
it may not output a complete .def file as the hierarchical search
does.

Output formats
--------------
The output formats "csv" and "param" are supported. The csv format
(Comma Separated Values) gives complete information about each
parameter and the class that it belongs to. This format is intended to
be used to understand what classes contributed to a set of
parameters. The "param" format is used to create files that can be
read by RHESsys and contains only the parameter value, name and
reference, if one exists for a parameter.

Ultra-quick start
-----------------
1. Use the default params.sqlite that was included in the distribution
tar file
2. Edit searchParams.sh
3. Run searchParams.sh

Quickstart
----------
1. Run createParamDB.sh
2. Edit insertParams.sh
3. Run insertParams.sh
4. Edit searchParams.sh
5. Run searchParams.sh

For Programmers - RHESsys Parameter Database Python API
-------------------------------------------------------
The insertParams.py, searchParams.py and deleteParams.py demonstrate
the use of the Python API.

To insert values into the database:

    import rhessys.constants as rpc
    from rhessys.params import paramDB

    location = None
    parentLocation = None
    parentName = None
    user = "Peter Slaughter"
    genus = "Alnus"
    species = "rubra"
    className = "Red Alder"
    classType = "stratum"
    comment = None
    reference = None
    replace = False
    verbose = False
    paramsDBfilename = rpc.PARAM_DB_FILENAME

    DBobj = paramDB()
    DBobj.insert(filename, location, classType, className, parentLocation, parentName, user, genus, species, comment, replace, verbose)

To search the database, you can perform either a "hierarchical" search
or a "constrained" search.

To perform a hierarchical search:

    import rhessys.constants as rpc
    from rhessys.params import paramDB

    comment = None
    className = None
    classType = None
    datetimeEnd = None
    datetimeStart = None
    location = None
    outputFormat = "csv"
    param = None
    genus = None
    outputPath = None
    reference = None
    searchType = None
    species = None
    user = None
    verbose = False
    DBobj = paramDB()
    DBobj.search(searchType, classType, className, location, param, genus, species, datetimeStart, datetimeEnd, user, reference)
    DBobj.write(outputPath, outputFormat)

To perform a constrained search:

    import rhessys.constants as rpc
    from rhessys.params import paramDB

    comment = None
    className = None
    classType = None
    datetimeEnd = None
    datetimeStart = None
    location = None
    outputFormat = "csv"
    param = None
    genus = None
    outputPath = None
    reference = None
    searchType = None
    species = None
    user = None
    verbose = False
    DBobj = paramDB()
    DBobj.search(searchType, classType, className, location, param, genus, species, datetimeStart, datetimeEnd, user, reference)
    DBobj.write(outputPath, outputFormat)

